The following was written by Ken R. van Wyck, and is reproduced here by
permission.





The following is a *very* brief tutorial on modifying FREEMACS - it may
be of some value to FREEMACS users.

Any FREEMACS function (they're called STRINGs in some docs) may be edited
using the "ef" function.  Ef, logically enough, stands for edit function.
Additionally, new functions may be added to any library of functions
using ef.  To invoke ef to edit, for example, a function called
my-function, type:  M-x ef  <CR>.  You will then be prompted for a
function name, enter: my-function <CR>.  FREEMACS will then open an EDIT
buffer (or append to an existing one) the ASCII source code to that
function if it exists.  You may edit that function as you edit any text.

Before I continue, a word on libraries.  A FREEMACS library is a
collection of these functions, stored in one common file.  By default,
FREEMACS loads three libraries.  They are:  EMACS.ED (the main, or
Fundamental library), KEYS.ED (a library containing all of the key
bindings), and USER.ED (a library containing code installed by you).
Each library has associated with it a library letter.  EMACS.ED is
known as F for fundamental, USER.ED is U, and KEYS.ED is K.  All
function names are preceeded by the name of the library that they're
in.  Also, if the function is user-callable, the library name is
followed by a ":".  For example, the ef function is stored in the
MINTED library (M), so the full name of the ef function is "M:ef".
When you use ef to edit a function, you can explicitly define which
library the function you want to edit is in by giving its full name,
or you can just say, for example, my-function as the function name.
Ef would then search ALL the loaded libraries for any function that
begins with "my-function".

The best place to put your code is in the USER (U) library.  New
versions of Freemacs will always be delivered with an empty USER library.

Ok, getting back to editing my-function.  Once you've edited the
function to your satisfaction, type: C-c C-c.  This runs the function
M-x done-editing.  This causes FREEMACS to read in all the new
function definitions.  You could then test your function(s) and, if
they're ok, type: M-x save-all-libs.  This would save all modified
libraries.  The next time you load FREEMACS, your modified function(s)
will be available.


In the function F&setup, the default libraries are loaded and some variables
are defined.  In addition, the files mentioned on the command line are
loaded.

The KEYS.ED library, as mentioned contains all your key bindings.
There are two ways to edit key bindings.  One is to use the functions
keys-edit and keys-read as per the FREEMACS documentation.  An
alternative, and perhaps better, method is to use ef and actually edit
the functions themselves.  For example, I may want to edit one of my
M- definitions.  I may want to load all my M- keys (for reference,
etc.).  So, I would type: M-x ef <CR>.  Then, use K.M- <CR> as the
name of the function.  (Note that the key binding functions are
preceeded by "K.", not "K:".)  FREEMACS would then load all the
functions which begin with K.M- which, in this case, is all of my M-
key bindings.  I could then edit any existing functions and add any
new ones.  When done, save the library as you would save any library
(see above).  A distinct advantage of doing it this way is that you
can bind keys to functions outside of the Fundamental library.  For
example, I wanted to bind a couple of keys to functions in my User
library.  Here is an example key binding function:

Name:K.M-l
[*]U:lowercase-word[*]

The key that is bound in this function is M-l, and it is bound to the
function U:lowercase-word.  The function definition is enclosed between
the [*]'s and may be on more than one line.  This, by the way, is the
structure of ALL FREEMACS functions.

Kenneth R. van Wyk
User Services
Lehigh University Computing Center
April 21, 1987
